That's the kind of thing that
multi-tenency can give you as well. It's
not necessarily between customers, but
it's just keeping your data separate and
having that database connection handled
really gracefully and very seamlessly by
Rails. The Rails does not make your life
easy when you want to work in this way
when you have multiple tenants in all
sitting in one database. I wanted to
make it as hard as possible for a
developer to accidentally shoot
themselves in the foot. Welcome back to
another episode of Recordables. This is
where we're sitting down with the 37
Signals technical team to dive into some
of the products that we make, including
Face Camp, Hey, Fizzy, and open-source
products. I'm Kimberly, your host, along
with my co-host from the mobile team,
Fernando. Hello, Fernando.
>> Hello. Hello.
>> And this week, we are talking a little
bit about multi-tenant Rails. We're
diving deep into a Rails topic. And to
do that, we have one of our programmers,
Mike Delesio, with us to do that. Mike,
welcome to Recordables. Thanks for being
here.
>> Really good to be here. Thank you for
inviting me.
>> Before we dive into this Rails specific
topic, Mike, tell us a little bit about
you, what you do here at 37 Signals. Oh,
and how long you've been here.
>> Sure. So, I've been at 37 Signals for
about a year and a half, about a year
and a half. And I work on the SIP team.
That stands for security,
infrastructure, and performance. So I do
a little bit less of the product work uh
and a little bit more of the backend
infrastructure and uh keeping things
running around here work which I love.
Uh it's what I did uh before I came to
37 signals at uh at Shopify where I was
on the team that worked on Ruby
performance there as well.
>> Amazing. Also another huge Ruby on Rails
shop. So that's very cool. Okay. So I
know you talked about this multi-tenant
Rails a bit at Rails Worlds last year.
Um, but we're going to have time to like
dive into it deep. I know you're going
to do some screen shares with us, so why
don't you just tell us a little bit
about this topic and obviously why
you're so passionate about it.
>> Oh, sure. Uh, so, uh, the concept of
multi-tenency
really just means keeping your customers
data separate and private from each
other because ideally you don't want one
customer to be able to access another
customer's data. But when it's all
together co-mingled in one big database,
uh, that is a risk. a developer could
introduce a bug that lets uh that data
go. And so multi-tenency is a little bit
about just keeping the boundaries uh
between customer data present. And so
Rails doesn't do a great job of making
this easy, right? It forces you to think
about it as an application level
concern. So in all of my models, I have
to keep in mind as a developer that, oh,
this model actually contains data for
all of my customers. And I need to
remember to select data that only
belongs to account ID 1 2 3 4. And if I
forget to do that, it'll work in test
and as soon as I push it to production,
people will see each other's data. So
um, when we were building Fizzy, here
are 37 signals. We wanted it to be
multi-tenant. We wanted one application
to work for all the customers similar to
what base camp does. And uh David cooked
up this hairbrain scheme of what if we
used SQLite which is a filebased
database. So instead of it being a a
server in the cloud that you connect to,
it's a file that sits on your local
machine and that that's where the
database is and so you don't have to go
over the network. So it's faster. uh
it's also a little more self-contained
uh where you could just delete the
database or move it around or copy it or
whatever you need to do. And he really
wanted to push the boundaries of what
what we could do in Rails with SQLite.
And so his idea was what if we made
Fizzy use like be multi-tenant with
SQLite where there's a separate database
file on disk for each of our customers
in Fizzy. And if you think about it,
right, that could be tens of thousands,
hundreds of thousands of customers.
we're gonna have hundreds of thousands
of SQLite files sitting on desk. Like
wouldn't that be really neat if we could
pull this off and kind of pointed me at
that problem and said go.
>> Okay. Wait, can I ask a quick question?
>> Sure.
>> This co-mingleled database I would
assume that's like common like what most
people are doing.
>> Yeah.
>> Yes. That is the dominant mode of
deploying web applications today in the
world and it works fine. Uh but it also
means that when you scale up you have to
scale your database machine way up. Like
if you look at what we have to do to run
base camp and hey we have large large
machines running the database. the
database is replicated across multiple
machines for redundancy
and um it takes a lot of takes a lot of
operational money and effort to keep
that running
>> and we don't currently have any of our
products that are not co-mingled
databases where each user has their own
database. This would have been the first
iteration of that. Is that a true
statement?
>> Correct. Yes. That's what that's what
that's what we were hoping for was to
really kind of change the paradigm about
how you deploy SAS apps. like can you do
it without having to have a big humongo
database machine that everything reads
and writes its data to and we almost got
there like I guess the maybe the
punchline to this story is we didn't uh
we didn't launch Fizzy with SQL light
unfortunately because it was a really
complicated problem and we ran out of
time. It doesn't mean it's not solvable
and it doesn't mean we won't solve it
just means it wasn't solved when we had
to go live with Fizzy. So I sort of
asked this question last time with uh
Jeremy when we were talking about the S3
migration and I was like isn't it just
copying files? Well with multi-tenant
multi-tenency isn't this like just sort
of like you have the file there. What's
what's the complicated aspect of it?
>> Yeah. Um that's a really good question.
Uh, I know there's a plan to have Kevin
on to talk about SQLite replication and
so he can probably talk about this a
little more deeply than I can, but I'll
try. If you only have one machine, you
only have one computer running your
website. That machine takes all the
connections, all the requests that come
in. It can go to its local files for all
of its data and return the response. And
life is good. And this is fine. If that
was what we wanted to launch with Fizzy,
we totally could have flipped the switch
and we would be live on it today. But
the reality is what you want to do to
have a world-class product is you want
to have it geographically distributed.
You want to have a data center in
Europe. You want to have a data center
in the pack. You want to have a data
center on the east coast and on the west
coast. And you want customers to be able
to go to the closest machine when they
do a read. uh and you want them to be
able to uh all write to the correct
machine. So if you think about SQLite,
if I have if I had four machines, right,
one in each of those regions,
if I do a write, how does the network
know where to send my request to?
Because that database can only be
written to on one of those machines.
Now, that's the thing about SQLite is
there's only one master copy that can be
written to at any point in time. So if
I'm if I'm in Europe and I try to do a
write, how does the network know that it
needs to go to the US and do the right
there because that's where my database
is. And that's where the complications
come in because we we can replicate the
database so it's readable everywhere.
But then when I do the request, all of a
sudden this integration between the top
and the bottom of your stack, the
network stack at the top, which is what
carries the request. And then you have
like rails and everything down to the
beta database. And the database level
needs to be coupled to the network level
in a way that's very unnatural. And so
that's what what Kevin and I had been
trying to build mostly Kevin uh is an
integrated stack where the database
routing and the request routing
all worked the same way. It's I'm I'm
not doing it justice uh there, but Kevin
could talk about it way in way more
detail than I
>> No, no, no. That makes sense.
>> And that that was actually that was
actually the bit that that caused us to
say this isn't quite ready yet. Um, and
we launched like fizzy with my SQL
instead of with SQLite,
>> right? That makes perfect sense. When
you have like a stack of things, you
usually don't want to jump between like
more than one. You don't want to jump
between more than one level. So, you
want to go straight down or straight up.
You don't want to go like, oh, the
database needs the network and then
that's where, right,
>> things get busy. No, I'm kidding. Um,
my question is, um, if I'm understanding
this correctly, there is like a single
source of truth. Let's let's talk about
this for for database example. There's a
single source of truth. So is that by
design uh due to how SQLite SQL SQL? Oh
my god, I've only read that. I've never
heard it spoken.
>> I I think most people say SQLite
>> SQLite. Is that a
>> I think the maintainers say SQLite.
>> That's how I would say it in Spanish.
I'll say SQLite. Um, is that a SQLite
design decision or is that like a 37
signals decision when you're trying to
explore?
>> That's that's how the database works,
right? So SQLite is intended to be it's
it's just a file that's on desk which
makes it great for things like mobile
applications which you can talk about
right now, right? SQLite is the most
widely deployed database in the universe
>> because it's on every Android and iOS
device in the world. And and it's great
because on a phone you only have one
writer which is the phone. Um, using
SQLite for a web app is a little bit
different. It's not necessarily what
SQLite was designed for, but again, um,
so because it's a it's a flat file, you
can have multiple processes on the local
machine,
>> open up that file and write to it or
read to it.
>> So, so on on a single machine, I might
have,
>> you know, a dozen web server processes
running.
>> That can all read and write to the file
and it's fine. But as soon as I go to
another machine that doesn't have access
to that hard drive,
that machine can no longer write to the
file. So that's that's really the
boundary we're talking about. We're
talking about the file system boundary.
And if you if you say that that these
are database level like design
decisions, I assume that there's some
sort of like uh conflict resolution or
like something that can be done at the
file level so that okay like there's
>> synchronization between two to two
escalate database.
>> This this is a great question. Yeah. So,
so if I have multiple processes that are
reading and writing to the database, uh
they can all read at the same time, but
only one can write at a time. And for
this, I think the default is to use pzix
file locking. So, it's just using the
file system lock um system call to uh to
prevent multiple processes from writing
to it at the same time. So this also
means that SQLite has an interesting
bottleneck that RDBMS's like my SQL or
Postgress don't have which is you can
only have one writer at a time but on
balance because the writes are so fast
right they're like I don't know nanconds
right it's just you're writing to the
local disk and not having to go over the
network which is maybe milliseconds
most the time it's not a big deal that
you can only have one writer at a time
that is really interesting so we we've
drifted a little bit so I want to just
tie what we're talking about back to the
multi-tenant conversation real quick.
>> So, we wanted to use SQL light and we
wanted it to be multi-tenant, but those
two things don't necessarily need to be
coupled together. So, um the active
record tenanted gem which we open
sourced a few months ago. We have had a
couple of contributors who've started
working on my SQL and Postgress support
for this gem. So the same kind of thing
applies where I might have for I'm going
to imagine the scenario here regulatory
reasons I need to have a separate
database for Europeans than I do for uh
North Americans GDPR what have you
contractual reasons I don't know but if
you have that problem rails does not
make your life very easy and a lot of
people end up deploying two versions of
their app one for Europe one for North
America and you don't necessarily need
to if you think about tenant not
necessarily as a customer specific thing
but maybe it's a region specific thing
you could have all of your US customers
route their MySQL database connection to
your you know US east to uh Amazon
region and you can have all of your
European customers routed to a Hetsner
box that you have sitting in Germany
that's the kind of thing that
multi-tenency can give you as well it's
not necessarily between customers but
it's just keeping your data
separate and having that database
connection handled really gracefully and
very seamlessly by Rails where today
it's very difficult to do that.
>> That's exactly Yeah, that's exactly that
that Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I was going to
eventually get to that point like when
you explained it like oh the database
layer is like down here and the network
layer is up there and you were trying to
make it work. I'm sure both you and
Kevin plenty of times were like we're
trying to make a square peg fin into
like a right. So yeah, so my followup
question was like oh this sounds like an
sort of like an application concern
>> and then you mentioned the decoupling
like oh okay like we were trying to make
SQL like work with multi-tenency but
they're not necessarily tightly coupled.
you could just split them apart and then
like use MySQL or Postgress or whatever,
>> right?
>> That is really interesting.
>> Uh my follow question then is is what
what is what is actually implemented in
fizzy
>> is
>> like what what what did we go live with?
>> Yeah. Did we just cut it all up or open
source the the gem and fizzy works like
regular and there's some open source
work that's happening?
>> Yeah. Uh so so right now Fizzy doesn't
rely on the multi-tenenting thing at
all. The version that we the version
that we open source but fizzy fizzy
itself is an open source project and so
you can actually go back through history
and you can see the point in time that
we had the multi-tenant um libraries all
working and we had and we ripped it out
and replaced it with my SQL.
>> What is that like on a technical level?
>> Yeah, sure. So okay. So do you remember
I mentioned that Rails does not make
your life easy if you want to do
multi-tenency. So there was a long tale
of bugs that were introduced by
switching from SQLite to my SQL or from
multi-tenant SQLite to uh using normal
rails and my SQL because if you think
about uh if you're in multi-tenant mode
right you have your your database your
Rails process is connected to the
database and so you can do something
like I want to find the user named
Fernando right so select star from users
where name equals Fernando and it'll get
and it'll it'll bring you back. But now
if we are in this MySQL database where
all of the customer data is comingled,
right? I can no longer say select star
where name is Fernando, I need to say
and where account ID equals 1 2 3 4. And
so there are a bunch of places where we
were relying on this um implicit
assumption that we're connected to a
database where all of the data belongs
to the same customer. And now we
switched over to my SQL and now all of a
sudden we had this this assumption
sprinkled throughout our code where we
weren't specifying the account ID the
way that we should. And so we had to go
in and find that. So you can actually go
through the fizzy source code history
and see us fixing these bugs one by one
as we went through it. Like I think it
was all one big bang, one big uh pull
request, but there were a lot of very
small changes we had to make in order to
do that. And that's that's that's the
sign I'm talking about here, which is
that Rails does not make your life easy
when you want to work in this way when
you have multiple tenants in all sitting
in one database.
>> I'm I'm not a Rails expert, but like the
the uh example that you gave sounds very
um lowlevel when it comes to like uh SQL
instructions like Rails wouldn't
wouldn't force you to do something like
No, no, no. My my question is
specifically like what part makes it
difficult from rails
>> uh to actually build multi-tenant
>> uh it's it's uh it's just the usability
there's nothing technical preventing so
there there's a really uh good uh mature
well- tested gem called apartment
>> because tenants and apartments and
everything right the word play
>> uh and apartment actually does make this
easy where apartment will um if you you
have to kind of decorate your rails
models with like oh I'm tenanted by
account ID and you have to put that in
all of your models right
>> but once you once you do that then
apartment will do some of the heavy
lifting and say that you have to have an
account ID specified or else it will
raise an exception to make it a little
safer
um and the the drawback I talked about
this a little bit in my Rails world talk
was built a long time ago I think it's
like 12 years old
And it's still um it's showing signs of
its age,
>> right? And it's not uh totally thread
safe in all circumstances, right? So
it's not taking advantage of a lot of
modern Rails. Um that connection
handling got completely rewritten a few
years ago. And uh so so Apartment is
still it's a little inefficient. So
Apartment I think does this thing where
it's it closes the database connection,
it opens a new one. And then if you want
to switch back, it has to close this one
and open the new one. As opposed to just
keeping a pool of connections open and
maybe doing something where you're like,
oh, there's like there's a max on number
of connections you can have open at a
time and we'll reap them if they're
unused. And I I built all of that into
the active record tenant to gem. It's
all it's all there. So, so Apartment
does handle the usability issues that
you're talking about though, like why is
it hard? And simply like this implicit
where account ID equals 1 2 3 4 has to
be in all of your database queries and
apartment will do a little bit of the
heavy lifting there. Does a good job
>> but it didn't do what we needed it to do
for fizzy.
>> It did not at all. No. No. It was a
little slow. It was um it wasn't thread
safe like I said. And also, oh this is
the other thing. It's apartment only
deals with the active record bit of
multi-tenency and it doesn't make the
rest of rails work
in multi-tenant mode. So
>> what what is the rest of rails?
>> Let me give you an example. So so Rails
is a really big framework. Um so I wrote
a list. Okay. So if you think about
there's a lot of things that the um that
Rails does that need to be aware that
we're working in this multi-tenant
space. So one is fragment caching. If I
if you we generate a view in Rails,
right? Rails does a really great job of
caching that view so that we don't have
to regenerate it the next time you ask
for it. But the cache is based on like
the record ID. And so you need to make
sure that if you have two records with
the same ID that belong to different
accounts. So account account A record
one and account B record one by default
will both try to write to the same cache
record. So this is another way that you
can accidentally get data from one
customer being shown to a different
customer because you're not hitting the
database but you're hitting the the view
fragment cache.
>> Oh,
>> if that makes sense. Yeah.
>> So, you've got to be careful about that.
Um, you want to maybe include your
tenant ID when you are uploading blobs,
attachments,
picture, pictures, whatever. Um, if you
have a customer who deletes their
account, you want to be able to easily
delete all of those attachments. Or
maybe they want an export. There's no
good way in Rails by default to say,
"Oh, these are all the files that belong
to customer A because they're all dumped
into one big directory or one big S3
bucket uh with no differentiation." So
having the tenant ID be in there would
be really great so that you can say,
"Oh, the the first, you know, tenant
account ID slash the blob ID is just a
good way to keep all of your files
organized on disk." That's something
else that the the active record tenant
to gem does. It sounds like a lot of
work. It was a long tale. It was a long
tale and it took about took about six
months to get it all working well and
fizzy.
>> Wow.
>> But but um as a result though, it's
super easy to make an existing
application multi-tenant.
>> Um and I I can I can walk you through
that if you want. I can share my screen
and actually walk you through what that
looks like. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Mike, it kind of sounds like some
of this solution is to eliminate the
human
>> factor. Like as you're describing this,
you're like, there's all these ways that
you can mess this up.
>> And it sounds like it's trying to
prevent some of that human error
potential.
>> Yes. I think that's that's a big part of
it is making sure that it is well I mean
that you you can turn that on its head a
little bit and be like oh well I'm
trying to make it usable because people
will invariably if you if you design
something that's not very usable then
invariably people are going to hold it
the wrong way. If you don't make the
hammer have a nice long handle they're
going to hold it by the head and try to
try to pound something with it. Right?
like so you usability and also like
safety are are for for me at least the
same dimension right it's it's kind of
the same topic
>> okay what are we looking at here
>> so here's I'm going to show you um we
have an application called writebook
that is open source uh and that you can
um get through the once program and you
can run it yourself and it's just for
handling documentation so we got a bunch
of books here that are our internal
documentation at 37 signals for example
and if I go into the programmer's
handbook book then I can get a nice uh
list of topics and each of these is page
in our documentation like it's just
right book. So this is a SQLitebacked
application.
So the idea is you can run right uh
anywhere you want digital ocean or on
your local machine and it'll be writing
to a local file uh that's just a SQLite
database and so I thought this would be
a really great way to show how easy it
is to make something multi-tenant. Why
don't I convert rightbook into a
multi-tenant application? So instead of
having one global uh everybody sees the
same uh the same documents, it it'll
actually build multiple instance. You
can actually have multiple instances of
writebook. So it'll be like
foo.rightbook.com
or bar.rightbook.com
for individual customers. So this is
what I this is what I did. Uh and it
turned out to be like super super easy.
So I'm going to show you the diff.
Here's I'm and I'm not lying. This is
the entire set of changes that I had to
make to running code to make right book
multi-tenant that is writes to multiple
SQL 8 databases. So I'll walk through
the changes real quick. You have to say
that your main database connection is
tenanted. It's just say if I if I wanted
to connect to a specific database, I
could add some arguments here. But by
default I'm just saying hey listen this
is the class that I want tenanted and
all of our models inherit from this
class. So they are all also tenanted.
>> Can I ask tenanted based on
what?
>> Oh so the tenant the tenant is just a
string. It's just a name.
>> Oh my god. Of course.
>> And that name is used by default. The
name is used I'll tie it all together in
a minute. The name is used by default
for the subdomain
>> that you're going to go to.
>> So foo.rightbook.com
the tenant is going to be foo.
>> Yeah.
>> And then the database name on disk is
also going to be foo
>> of course.
>> So that's that's how again like the
network layer and the database layer get
tied together because we've named them
the same thing here.
>> Um and so at the database level right
this is your our database config. What
we've had to do is change the name of
the database, the path where it used to
be storage dbdevelopment, it's now
storage
oh I've got this little percent tenant
in here. So this is um if you're
familiar with printf, this is just a a
format specifier that at runtime is
going to be replaced with the name of
the tenant.
And I have to do that for all of our um
all of our environments. So development,
test, and production is the same change.
And then I have to make sure that when
um I actually hit in development, I hit
a host that it has a wild card where I
can hit any
um I can hit any host I want. So let me
let me show you how this actually works.
Uh it may it might be a little bit
easier. So I'm going to start off from
scratch. I've deleted all the databases.
Uh I'm going to start up the server.
Ah, and it's going to say, um, if I try
to go to writebook.lohost, it's going to
give me an error. And it's going to say,
oh, well, I can't connected. I can't
connect to a tenanted database while
you're untened.
So, it say it's telling me that I'm
untened because I haven't provided that
subdomain.
So, if I go and I do mike.rightbook,
it's not going to say ah, tenant not
found Mike. Very cool. So um
so if I go to the console the Rails
console and I say uh application record
and that was the class that had tenanted
added to it. It's our base class uh
create tenant
um
bar.
So what what it just did was it just
created the database and it applied all
of the schema migrations and now that
database is live on disk.
So if I go and I look in um find
storage, there's now a database called
fubar db development.sqlite. And if I go
here instead of Mike and I now go to
fubar,
it's going to kick me into the first run
and prompt me to enter everything. So, I
could be like, "Oh, my name is Mike."
Um, my fake password.
Right. What it's going to do now is it's
uh booting up the database uh and
loading up the initial Oh, it didn't do
it. Hang on.
My password wasn't long enough. There we
go. Now, it's going to work. Ah, so now
I've got the right book manual, which is
by default this gets added. Uh, and if I
look at what's in storage now, u you'll
see this is not great. Uh, tree
Right. You can see that now I've also
got all my active storage files are
being stored in a directory pulse bar as
well like automatically because um I
mentioned I think that all of the blob
keys get the tenant slash added to the
front of them which turns into on disk.
Um
I've now got a directory that has all of
the fuar tenants images from from this
document. This is super cool. Thank you.
That's great to hear. Is this the new
default for like would should be this be
the new default for Rails?
>> It feels like a straight up improvement.
>> I would love for this to land in Rails.
I feel like it's got to actually be
running somewhere in production first.
>> No, no, no. Of course, of course, of
course. Like, my plan, my dream is this
this would get upstream into Rails
because it's it's additional. If you
don't want it,
>> who cares? you can continue to use Rails
the way you always did, but if you want
to work in this way, then yeah, turn on
a bunch of these configs and you'll get
it for free.
>> Yeah, I would love to see this in Rails
at some point. Now one one question I
have is
uh in this hypothetical scenario if you
were to have like multi- tenant as a
default
>> could uh what's what would change in the
configuration
so that you didn't need to have like
subdomains tied to tenants. I'm sure
it's possible.
>> Ah right. So yes. So so the gem by
default uh ships with um what I will
call a it's it's actually it's rack
middleware which maybe isn't a isn't a
helpful phrase but the web server
framework is called rack and that
handles the request and what we can do
and that the way it works is that the
request gets handed to each stage before
it finally arrives at the app and you
can insert a stage in there and that's
what that's what um the gem does. It
inserts a stage that looks at the
subdomain that says ah there's a
subdomain in here. I will now look on
disk to see if that is a valid tenant
and if it is I will connect to it and if
it is not I will raise an error. So by
default that looks at subdomain but you
can override that and you can use
whatever logic you want. It's provided I
will uh see if I can get the cham right.
Yeah. So you could just consider Sorry.
Yeah. Yeah.
>> No go ahead. Oh, I was going to say you
could easily consider the uh like the
base
like the the the default domain
>> as a tenant, right?
>> Oh, you could. Yes, you could. Yeah.
>> And then that way you could get both the
subdomains each as individually named
tenants and the top level domain as a
tenant itself.
>> Yes, you could.
>> Wow.
>> You can do whatever you want.
>> Super cool.
>> It's literally the way this is
configured. You actually just pass in a
a lambda an anonymous function.
>> Right. right?
>> That takes the request and hands back
the tenant name. So by default it's just
going to use the subdomain.
>> But when so and so uh if you look in
fizzy in the source code uh what we're
actually doing there is we look at the
path
and the first section of the path is a
big number and that's the account ID and
we we do that just like Basec camp does.
So it's that you can take it out of the
path, you can take it out of the domain,
you can take it out of the host name if
you want to. Some of these are
operationally easier than others. Like
having a separate domain for every
customer means you have to worry about
regenerating SSL keys,
>> right?
>> Uh and what is and how is your web
server going to do that? And can you
dynamic can you automatically regenerate
those SSL keys every 90 days? So
somewhere harder or easier, but you have
the flexibility to do whatever you want.
>> Mike, tell me this. I know in your Rails
world talk you mentioned something about
safety checks. Is there something that
you can show us on how that exactly
works or what you're checking for?
>> Safety clearly.
>> Yes. Yes. Absolutely. So, so one of the
things that I think is uh we talked
about usability a little bit earlier and
usability and safety kind of being um
different points on the same spectrum. I
wanted to make it as hard as possible
for a developer to accidentally shoot
themselves in the foot. And so um
>> so if I uh
>> eliminating that human error
possibilities again.
>> Yes, exactly. So if I do user.first uh
this is on the Rails console. So I'm
running Ruby code. Uh I get an exception
saying oh well database there's a uh
there's like a default tenant here right
which is like development tenant when
I'm in development mode and that tenant
doesn't exist. Uh so if I do uh our
application record
with tenant and then I can pass a block
and whatever I do in this block is going
to be in the context of this tenant. So
I can just say uh fubar which is the
tenant we just created. Uh I can do
user.first and it'll return me a user
from that database. And I know it's from
that database because I can see in here
it has tenant fuar as an attribute on
that model which is great. Tells me that
that object belongs to that tenant. So I
can uh pull this out. I could say user
equals blah. Now what happens if I try
to update that user or write to that
user while I'm in the context of a
different tenant? It should raise an
error for that too. So um I have to
create a
a second tenant
which I will just call second and it
again it migrates the whole database. So
now what if I am in the context of the
second database
and I try to do user.update update um
name is I'm going to try to change the
name on that user.
It's going to give me a safety exception
saying the user model belongs to tenant
fuar but you're currently connected to
tenant second
to prevent you from doing this at at
runtime. So if there's any kind of a bug
that's introduced uh where you might be
saving one record to a different tenants
database uh you can't cross the streams
anymore because it does the safety
checks where it compares the um the ten
the the objects tenant string to the uh
connection uh string if that makes
sense.
>> So those safety checks are already built
into the gym that you created.
>> That's correct. They're built into the
gem to make it as hard as possible for
people to cross the streams and mix
co-mingle customer data.
>> You're making this sound very
straightforward and very simple, but we
also didn't put this in fizzy. I'm
curious if we just needed more time
because we're working against a deadline
or there was something else that made it
not appropriate for what we were doing.
Like why did we not how come it didn't
happen?
>> Yeah, the the main reason is that we ran
out of time. like we we had everything
working and there were some some edge
cases. If you think about going live
with a global product, you want it to
have like automatic failover where if a
machine goes down, you want everything
to immediately kind of cut over to the
backup. And with with the SQL a database
that becomes really interesting to do
because you need to make sure that
you've got the database file being
replicated in real time to a second
machine where it's available kind of in
readonly mode and then as soon as this
machine goes down you need to have
something outside
cut requests over to the second machine
and it go into writable mode. So this
all of a sudden becomes the primary
where it used to be a secondary or a
backup machine and that was where that
was where things there's a there's a
long list of like edge cases there. Um
there's a there's a phrase people use
which is like emergent behavior like
complex systems have interesting
emergent behavior. That is behavior that
you only see in uh when certain weird
edge cases happen or when things happen
in a certain order. And what we were
going through was about once a week
finding a new edge case in this
complicated system we had built where
there's SQLite and there's tenanting in
Rails and that was pretty solid that was
working well but then we needed to
replicate it globally and we needed to
have network routing route requests to
the right place and then we also needed
failover to work properly
and making all of that work uh in time
for the release it just didn't happen.
We just didn't have enough time to work
out all of the bugs.
>> I'd be remiss if I didn't ask this, but
this work was like last year, right?
Middle of last year, more or less. it
was um so the multi-tenant gem was
worked on mostly the first half of 2025
and then the replication
and failover work was like the middle of
2025 like the summer and fall of 2025.
So given that that this is 2026, the the
obvious question I have to ask is do you
think we're uh
the amount of time would have been
reduced had you been using AI? Oh, the
AI question. Uh I don't I don't know. I
don't know uh if if we could get an AI
in agent that was able to do things like
deploy to our staging environment,
actively monitor all of the systems like
simulate like it would it might have
been helpful to have uh an agent help us
with a lot of those testing scenarios.
Yeah. But like we we actually we did use
AI for quite a bit of the replication
stuff too if you if you go look at it.
So, I'm hopeful that Kevin will open
source Beamer. Beamer was the code name
of the replication uh stack that he that
he wrote. Um, and a lot of that is Go
code, which uh LLMs are great at writing
Go code because it's very it's very
simple language
uh syntactically anyway. It's it's
simple. So, we did have a lot of AI help
on some of this. Um the multi-tenant gem
was I think a little bit tougher task
for uh agents because
it it was something that was novel and
it was trying to shoehorn something new
into
the existing framework and so there were
a lot of design decisions that had to be
done. So um the version of the gem that
is open source now I think is version
four if you believe that I think it's
version four um where where the first
version was just spike threw it away but
then I wrote two more versions and I was
unhappy with the API and threw them away
before I landed on an API that I was
really happy with that felt Railsy
and that felt like it wasn't getting in
the way and also that was extensible in
ways
um that would lead to creative problem
solving. Let me give you an example of
that. So I always I always think that uh
uh you can tell that something is
designed well if people can use it for
purposes that it was not originally
designed for.
And I came across one of these uh late
in the fizzy um in the fizzy development
work where we realized that we needed we
were already tenanting by customer. So
every customer had their own SQLite
database
but we wanted to we wanted to replicate
by region. So we wanted to have for
example all of the North American
customers in our Chicago data center and
all the European customers in our
Amsterdam data center. And then that
meant that when we were running um
background jobs, right, we would have to
have one database for North America
and one database for Amsterdam because
the job workers are local. They have to
write to the local SQLite discs and they
have to keep their state in their own
database too. So it's like you'd have a
job worker in the US that connect to any
of the US customer databases
but then had its own database as well to
keep state in. And you had to have the
same thing in Amsterdam. And if we had
multiple data centers, we we do that in
multiple places. And so what what I
ended up doing was we had um the
customer databases tenanted by account
ID and then we had the solid Q databases
tenanted by region. So within the same
application, we had two different
dimensions of tenanting going on.
And the apartment gem would not be able
to handle this because the apartment gem
acts as a it's a global. It's a
singleton apartment and you be like
apartment.create tenant. And you'll
notice that when I was just showing you
in the Rails console that I was actually
using the application record application
record was was uh annotated with
tenanted and I went to application
record.create
tenant and so all of the tenanting
methods live on your application models.
They don't live on some other class that
the gem is bringing. They live on your
application models. And because I did
that and I I mostly did because it just
felt a little bit more natural to me.
But because I did that then late in the
fizzy development process I was like aha
I can use tenanting for solid c for
solid q as well and then I would do you
know solid q record basecreate
tenant and I'd pass in the region and
that was how you create the solid cache
database because like
that API just ended up working much
better for that for that use case.
Anyway, where was I going with this? I
was going to the point where uh it took
me three generations of API design
before I landed on one that I thought
was razy and flexible enough to do some
interesting things. And I don't think an
AI could have necessarily helped me get
there better get there better or faster.
I agreed. Sorry, I'm trying to wrap my
mind around this. Why are you tenanting
the solid Q by region? The current
version of Fizzy does not do this, but
when we were still using SQLite,
>> again, the idea was that our solid Q
database is still SQLite
and needs to live on a machine.
And um a process needs to know that if
it's running in the US, it should
connect to the US database and if it's
running in Amsterdam, it should connect
to the Amsterdam database.
And we needed to replicate that also. So
we were also replicating the solid Q
databases
so that if the US went down,
it wouldn't be a complete outage. We
would reroute everything over to Europe
and North American customers would just
get routed to Europe until we were able
to get the US back up and running. So
like for for failover and replication
purposes, we're still replicating those
databases. Uh it's just that then in
that case in Europe we would have two
solid Q clusters running. One would
connect to the European database and one
would connect to the US database.
They're both still local out. So that's
why we were using ten like we could have
done something more complicated but the
fact that t tenanting was right there
and it just automatically like
multipplexed to the databases based on
whatever region they were running for
>> like you know you look at the customer
database any and you say that that
customer is in the US region so I should
connect to the US soloq database like it
just ended up working really well
>> that's awesome that's really
>> well if it had gone live in production
it would have been even more interesting
but maybe someday we'll get there
>> do you platform.
>> Uh I do. So um like I showed you, I just
made uh write book multi-tenant with
like honestly that was like five minutes
support.
>> I was able to make it multi-tenant. Now
there's a little bit more you need to do
around like oh I need to document how
this works for people and I need to give
them a script so they can create a new
account when they want to
>> and uh they may need to create like a
wildcard SSLert if they want to run this
themselves on their own machine. So like
there's like a long tale of like little
things, but like the bulk of the code
change was very quick. Uh five minutes.
So one one possible path forward that
I've been talking to David about is um
can we take all of our once products
that are all running on SQLite and make
them all multi-tenant.
Demonstrate that um the multi-tenant gem
active record tenanted uh does work. Uh
get some miles on it. I I feel like I
really want to run it in production
somewhere so that then it's a more
compelling argument about upstreaming it
to Rails. Um I would love to try to get
um future product that we're working on
on this as well. But but again like the
the the I feel like the active record
multi-tenented gem is pretty solid
because it had like a year almost where
we were running it uh internally on
Fizzy. We were using Fizzy most of last
year and it was it was solid. It was
work. it worked well. We didn't really
have any problems with it for the last
uh six months or so. The complication
was around replication and failover and
really we need to to solve that. And so
like I want to keep working with Kevin
to hopefully finish up Beamer
>> and really get that working because
>> and there's another missing concern in
Rails that I would love to fix at some
point which is um failover. There's no
concept in Rails of what what host am I
running on and should I fail over? Solid
Q has started to scratch at this with
how it manages its connection handling.
Um, and I actually built uh I have a
fork of solid uh solid Q that knows
whether it is in active or passive mode
based on whether uh based on something
that's in the database, right? Like you
can have a flag in the database that
says you have your primary in North
America and your and your backup is in
Europe. you have the solid Q job cluster
running in both places but nobody's
doing anything in Europe because the US
is the primary right so this is all code
that we we already have in hey that
basically you know lifted I jammed into
solid Q it totally worked in solid Q and
I was like all right we're using this in
in one app we're using it in a library
why isn't this primitive in Rails why
shouldn't there be a class in Rails that
tells you are you in fail are you in
primary mode or are in like passive
backup mode. And if you have that, then
a lot of the Beamer replication code
becomes much simpler as well. So there's
like a whole path here, but I really
want Rails to become a little bit more
capable around failover and replication
than it is today.
>> Mike, question for you for anyone who's
listening and is like, "Okay, I totally
get this and I can use this gem and this
doesn't seem hard." Do you have any like
pieces of advice or like things you
should make sure to look out for that
you can share?
>> Yeah. Um, that's a really good question.
So, the the one thing I think that I
would love some more feedback on is how
um the gem approaches action cable. So,
brief summary of what action cable is is
it's the ability to do uh to push data
to uh to a web client.
you know, under the hood, it's using
websockets, maintaining an open
connection. And so, um, the the most
common use for this these days in Rails
is Turbo Hotwired and Turbo where you
can essentially broadcast data. So, we
use this everywhere in our apps to push
uh notifications, to push chats, to push
card updates if someone um changes the
status on it. So, you're pushing data to
the web client. that connection is also
has to be tened because you don't want
to push it push data for one customer to
a different customer and and a lot of
that is reusing the same uh middleware I
referenced earlier where you know
request comes in how do you find out
what tenant that request is for I've
only solved one problem with that which
was Fizzy's problem and so I would ask
people if they're going to kick the
tires on the gem to make sure that uh
action cable is wired up correctly for
your use case and let me know if it's
So Mike, where
uh I'm on the mobile side, right? So
when when it comes to like rich stacks,
where where is that stored? How do you
handle that that with the multi-tenant?
>> Uh thanks for asking. So So Rails uh has
a relatively complicated system um for
how it stores its its own data and by
that I mean like there's metadata around
active storage uploads. There's some um
the actual action the rich text content
is stored in a separate record. So, so
Rails has it needs its own tables
basically. So, if you're going to use
any of the rich text stuff, um you need
action text and active storage and that
means that those need to be in separate
tables. And so, the gem actually um
jumps through some hoops to make sure
that the rails models are using your
tenanted database too. So the idea is,
you know, if in my tenanted database I
have my card class and the card has some
rich text and the rich text has some
attachments,
you want to be able to do a join across
all of those tables. So they all need to
be in the same database. And so um
there's actually a concept in the gem of
being a subtenant
of your database. So like your
application models are the official
tenants like they are the tenants but
then you can have these Rails records
that normally would be I don't know like
in some other they're in your primary
database if your primary database is
tenanted then all of a sudden these
Rails records are subtenants.
Um and you we can't do it through class
inheritance like in in your Rails
application all of your classes inherit
from application record. So you make the
change there and everything else gets it
because they're the subasses, but the
Rails records are in a completely
separate like hierarchy of classes. And
so we actually we have to actually
inject some behavior into those classes.
But it it all just works at the end of
the day where then you can do that join
across all of those classes. And it also
means that those Rails data records also
don't get co-mingled. Um and we have
that um multi-tenant boundary between
all that data.
>> Mike, so is there a place where people
can find this gem and if so we'll add it
to our
>> show. There is a GitHub repository for
the gem. It is open source. It's been
open source uh for a few months now. And
also you can go to the fizzy source code
if you want go back through history and
actually see how it was being used.
>> That's perfect. Well, thank you for
joining us. This has been an episode of
Recordables, a production by 37 signals.
To hear more from our technical team
like Mike and Fernando, check out our
developers blog that is at blog. No,
that is at dev.37s signals.com. I like
don't even know what that address is.